---
layout: post
title: "My experiences creating a Udemy course"
date: 2025-01-04 16:07:00 +0000
categories:
  - Udemy
  - AWS
  - CDK
---

I decided to try self-employment in early 2023, and I had a contract cancelled
at the very last minute. While I was on holiday, in fact! I wanted to make use
of the free time I had, so I decided to write and publish a Udemy course. I've
always enjoyed learning about programming languages or the cloud, and most of
that has been through Udemy courses. So, why not!

## My experience with tutorial videos

It's worth noting that prior to creating this course, I'd already filmed a
number of tutorial videos for programming. I've always enjoyed making them, and
so I've been through a fair few failed attempts while I tried different ways of
filming videos. My personal approach is to create a rough outline of each video
and then to try and film it all in one take. I often make mistakes, so I leave
enough time to easily edit out that chunk and then start again repeating the
last ~15 seconds.

If you haven't ever tried creating tutorial videos, I'd suggest filming a few
and uploading them to YouTube. If you're anything like me, it'll take some time
to get used to hearing your own voice and overcoming the desire to perfect what
you film before you upload it.

## Choosing a topic

Part of my motivation for creating the course was my experiences working with
people learning AWS' CDK. I wasn't happy with the documentation that was
available, and I felt it left out a lot of important tips, tricks and
workarounds. At that point in time, CDK had a lot of rough edges, and I wanted
to share the methods I'd found to make it easier to use.

If I could give you only one piece of advice, it would be to create a course
that's related to something you're living and breathing every day. I've tried
to make tutorial videos in the past for topics I was less excited about, and
they were nowhere near as good.

## How long did it take to make the course?

End-to-end it took me around three full weeks to film and edit the course. I
was working on it full time, and spent a number of evenings getting the last
few videos over the line. I didn't have to spend very long researching any
topics as I'd been working with CDK daily before starting. Expect to spend a
lot longer if you need to brush up your own knowledge first.

I ended up with around eight and a half hours of content to upload to Udemy.

## How much money did I make?

Udemy is very clear about [how the revenue split works], and at the time of
writing they pay 37% of the transaction value if they bring the user to the
course. If you refer a user with your own link, you get 97%. The real learning
here for me is that external marketing or using your own network is vastly more
effective than relying on Udemy to bring in sales that don't earn a huge
commission. If I were to create another course, I would explore doing my own
marketing or using agencies. If you go that route - let me know how it goes.

All in all, I made just over $1,000 dollars in roughly a year of sales with the
course. At just over Â£6 an hour, it's certainly not the best paid job I've ever
had, but I really enjoyed making it and got a lot out of the process. Let me be
an example of the fact that selling the course on Udemy requires work.

[how the revenue split works]: https://support.udemy.com/hc/en-us/articles/229605008-Instructor-Revenue-Share

## What advice would I give you?

There are a number of things that I would do differently if I created another
course:

### Editing software and video storage

I used iMovie to edit the course, and in reality would have been better served
by using something with more functionality. I would normalize audio volumes
across videos and found iMovie's concept of projects quite clunky.

I also underestimated how much storage space would be required. I reached
just shy of 900GB of video files, which isn't super easy to store on a laptop
with everything soldered in place.

### Removing noise from the audio

I manually edited out most of the _"mouth noises"_ I made while filming the
video, but would've been better served by finding a way to automate that and
investing in an audio setup that makes it less likely to happen. Take it from
me: it's a time-consuming and boring job.

### Marketing

It's mentioned above, but I'd explore ways to market the course myself. Any
customer acquired for around seven pounds or less would've been a win.

## Conclusion - would I do it again?

As I've mentioned, creating video tutorials was an existing passion of mine and
so the lacklustre sales figures wouldn't put me off from trying something again
in the future. If I were to create another course, I would most likely release
it for free on YouTube, and then build a community first. I've worked with some
extremely talented people who've successfully built a following by consistently
putting out really high quality articles around AWS. I think they're very well
positioned to do something like this with more commercial success.

For me, it's much more about doing something that keeps my passion for tech
going than creating a high-performing side hustle. Udemy users get a lot of
value for the small sum they pay for courses, myself included, so you have to
make your own judgement about if it's worthwhile.
